---
layout: default
title: Pole Lathe
author: Michael Schmitz
category: projects
---

# Pole Lathe

In May of 2016, I started making a pole lathe.  I don't know why I started
making a pole lathe, but perhaps it was because I liked the design of Roy's
pole lathe and I acquired some free timbers which would work.  The design made
heavy use of wood: 4x8 legs with 4x6 feet and a lathe bed made with 4x4s.  The
lathe bed was connected to the legs with dovetails, meaning the legs needed to
protrude several inches above the bed.

While building the lathe, I worried that my timbers were absurdly large.  My
friend Paul mentioned, "what are you going to be turning, elephants?" when he
saw my stack of timbers.  However, I'm quite happy with the design after
completion.  It's solid construction limits vibration and rocking and it's
stable enough that I can stand on it without concern.  To have build something
so stable without fasteners is a point of pride.  I probably won't ever
disassemble my pole lathe, but I could.

My first attempt at turning went pretty poorly.  I used a single thin board as
my treadle.  It flexed and swayed side to side.  I rigged a bike tube in my
garage ceiling, which wacked me in the head.  I used thin inexpensive cord
which bound easily and frayed quickly.  My tool rest was poorly positioned,
unstable, and far from the workpiece.  On top of this, I used a carving gouge
that wasn't super sharp.  Nonetheless, I made something that was round,
although splintery.

Much of the challenge in making my pole lathe run smoothly has been in tuning
the tension, improving the tool rest, and making a more stable treadle.
Discovering more turnable pieces of wood has also helped.

## Tension

Ideally I would have continuous tension during the entire turning stroke.
Unfortunately, bungees don't work this way.  The tension starts out minimal and
increases to a maximum when the threadle hits the ground.

I started with a bike tube oriented vertically.  This worked poorly because it
required a lot of vertical distance, which limits the potential length of a
stroke.

Mounting the bike tube horizontally (secured at two points) and then pulling
down from the center worked better.  Unfortunately bike tube easily snap if
they are overexterted--good thing we had several!  I found that it's important
to have enough force to quickly return the piece, but similarly important to
not have too much tension.  Otherwise I would overwork myself for little gain.

## Treadle

Roy Underhill says he prefers using a single board as a treadle.  He must be
significantly more balanced than me, because I find that a single board works
terribly.  Every few strokes my foot wobbles, causing the string to walk along
the turned piece and ultimately bind against the poppet.

Instead, I prefer a Y-shaped treadle, where the forked bit contacts the ground.
I tried building a Y out of oak floorboards, but the boards flexed, wasting
potential tension, and the screws/nails failed.  I switched to a vine maple
crotch with tenoned cross-branches in the Y.  This transformed my turning night
and day.  Not only did my treadle resist wobbling, but it stayed perfectly
rigid causing a smooth stroke.  Unfortunately my mortises weakened the treadle
until it failed.  I built a new one out of another crotch but with oak boards
fastened across.
